[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory, and we have an
amazing guest for you tonight.
Christopher Dunn has had
an extensive background
as a master craftsman.
He was recruited by an American
aerospace company where
he has worked at almost
every level of high tech
manufacturing.
Then he decided to
pursue something else.
And over the years, he's been
investigating the Giza Pyramid
area in Egypt.
He has written several
books, "The Giza Power Plant"
and also "Lost Technologies
of Ancient Egypt."
Chris, welcome to the program.
Good to have you with us.
>>CHRISTOPHER DUNN:
Thank you, George.
I appreciate being here.
>>NOORY: What amazing
research you've done.
Now how did you get
interested in the pyramids
and the structures there?
>>DUNN: Well, I would
go back 40 years.
>>NOORY: 40 years?
>>DUNN: Yes.
1977, I was reading
Peter Tompkins'
book, "Secrets of
the Great Pyramid,"
and as I was reading
that book, it
occurred to me that the
Great Pyramid seemed
to have an order of
precision and engineering
that was a lot higher than
a primitive culture would
actually produce if you consider
using copper chisels and stone
balls to be
primitive, which I do.
Even though they may be
sophisticated in other ways,
those are the only
tools that have
been found in the
archaeological record
and which Egyptologists
claim were
used in the creation of
all the marvelous artifacts
that you find in Egypt.
>>NOORY: Chris, you have
been to Egypt several times.
>>DUNN: Yes.
>>NOORY: When you walk
up next to the pyramids,
how awe-inspiring is that?
>>DUNN: Well, that's a
very interesting question.
I could relate that
to the first time
I went to Egypt,
which was in 1986.
And I had already
developed some ideas
and done a lot of reading
about the Great Pyramid,
and it was almost like I was
afraid to go up to the plateau
to visit the pyramid.
I circled it for three days.
And it wasn't until I
was there for three days
before I actually went up there.
And it was awe-inspiring,
and even today it
is a magical place to be.
And it's an amazing
feat of human endeavor.
>>NOORY: Oh my god, I know.
>>DUNN: The engineering, the
precision is outstanding.
I mean, even today,
we don't build
to that order of
precision that they
build the Great Pyramid to.
>>NOORY: You have long
believed that the pyramids were
power plants.
Explain that, and what
were they powering up?
>>DUNN: Yes, my impression as
I was reading Tompkins' book
and also doing other research
was that the pyramids had
the precision of a machine,
and so therefore it
would have had the
function of a machine.
And based on that
premise, and also
considering the very details and
schematics of the Great Pyramid
do not represent any structure
where human activity would take
place, whether it
be a temple or even
a tomb-- which, you know, they
call it a tomb-- there are so
many anomalies involved
in that building
that it just didn't make sense.
And so based on the premise
that it was a machine,
I considered it to
be a power plant.
And of course, the anomaly and
phenomena of power in that area
has been discussed
for many years.
And so based on that, I wondered
how each particular feature
within the pyramid would have
contributed to that endeavor,
to actually create power.
>>NOORY: Christopher, if
they drew the energy out
of the planet, for example,
through the pyramids, any idea
what they would use it for?
>>DUNN: They could use it
for just about anything
that their imagination
devised, or they could just
draw it out and waste it.
>>NOORY: What if they
had flying machines,
and this was used
to power them up?
>>DUNN: Yes, even that.
I mean, even today
they are discussing
the concept of
launching spacecraft
and reducing the
fuel it has to carry
and actually feeding it with
microwave energy in flight.
>>NOORY: Yeah, same kind of
technique, that's possible.
>>DUNN: Yeah, so I
wouldn't put it past them.
>>NOORY: There seems to be a
reluctance in the modern era
to accept the fact that the
Egyptians might have possessed
incredible technologies.
>> Looking at the architecture
of structures from ancient
Egypt stimulates
a sense of wonder.
Clearly, Egyptian monuments
rival the grandeur of our most
modern buildings today.
Yet we are taught
to believe that we
are the ones with knowledge
of high technology, something
the ancients could
not possibly have had.
>>CARMEN BOULTER:
As long as we think
that the ancients weren't
able to use high technology,
then we're not looking for it.
And yet the evidence is
right in front of our eyes.
>>NOORY: Why don't we
accept that overall?
>>DUNN: I think it's
the order of progression
of how civilizations have
progressed on the earth.
>>NOORY: Are we in denial?
>>DUNN: It seems to be-- it's
more of a Western-based point
of view.
It's almost like it started
with the Greeks and the Romans,
and they kind of vaguely
refer back to the Egyptians.
But the Greeks and the
Romans were the found--
considered to be the foundation
of Western civilization.
So I think the interpretation
of the monuments
has always been with the view
that the Egyptians did not
rise to the level of those
later cultures, the Greeks
and the Romans.
Whereas when you actually go
to Egypt and, as an engineer
and a craftsman, and you look
at the quality of the work
that they were
doing, you can see
that they were much
more advanced in what
they were able to produce.
>>NOORY: And obviously,
Christopher, before they
built the pyramids, somebody
had to schematically draw things
out in order to develop
a plan when they put
it together architecturally.
How was that done?
Because the little crevices
and the little areas
and the tombs and the shafts
are just magnificently laid out.
>>DUNN: Well, that's
a very important point
to make in that
the Great Pyramid
and how it is constructed and
the design and precision of it,
it could not have taken
place-- it could not
have been built
without some protocol
without some drawings or plans.
>>NOORY: Right, the forethought
must have been amazing.
>>DUNN: It's a way to transmit
information to people who
are going to perform the work.
So, while you may conceive of
a product or an engineering
product like the
Great Pyramid, you
have to transmit your
knowledge of the information
and your design criteria
and the specifications
to a myriad of other
people, different trades,
you know, whether
they be skilled
trades, semi-skilled
trades, laborers, whatever.
That information has
to be transmitted
so they would have had to have
had a way of transmitting that.
>>NOORY: Wouldn't
it be great to find
the architectural schematics
of the great pyramids?
And what would that show
us if we could find that?
>>DUNN: Well, I mean, I think
if you were able to find it,
the question is how did--
how did they record it?
I mean, today, well, when I
started off with engineering,
information was transmitted
via drawings on paper.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>DUNN: Today--
>>NOORY: What would
they have done, papyrus?
>>DUNN: Today we use computers.
We hold that knowledge
on hard drives, on disks,
and flash drives.
And I'll trans--
you know, hold it
on the cloud or
something like that.
So we have means of transmitting
information that's a lot
different today than
what it was 50 years ago.
How they did it in ancient
Egypt, I don't know.
I mean--
>>NOORY: I'm sure they didn't
draw it out in the sand.
>>DUNN: Oh, no, no, no, no.
>>NOORY: They had
something else going on.
>>DUNN: You see, this
is the thing, George.
What you have with
the Great Pyramid
is actually the perfect
example of the sophistication
of the culture.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>DUNN: And yet when we
start to try and analyze
how they created this structure
and how they transmitted
information, we
fall back to methods
that are less sophisticated
than the structure actually
tells us.
And so, you know, it's
like the state of the art
then was very high.
And I can imagine the
methods that they used
and the ancillary
trades and products
were similarly
sophisticated and advanced.
>>NOORY: Why did we
lose the knowledge
of how they built these?
What happened to this gap
and how did it get there?
>>DUNN: I think it's a--
you know, it's kind of
like we develop along
a particular line.
We'll have significant
personalities
of our people with genius
that come among us in society,
and they present ideas.
They develop formulas.
They develop technologies, and
those technologies are adopted,
and then they become
embedded in our culture.
But they follow a particular
idea, a particular method
of doing things.
And I would suggest
that they, you know,
that path could have gone on
a totally different direction,
and our products today
will be entirely different.
We may be achieving
the same thing
but doing it in a different way.
But it's just, you
know, sometimes, I mean,
nature sometimes dictates how we
do things, nature and physics.
We can't violate
the laws of physics,
if we consider-- if we know
what all those laws are.
>>NOORY: Which we're learning
every day more and more.
>>DUNN: Right.
>>NOORY: There have been
recent discoveries of voids
in some of these chambers.
>>DUNN: Yes.
>>NOORY: Tell me a
little bit about that.
>>DUNN: Well, yes,
just recently they
had a team in the
Great Pyramid, and they
were using
muonography, muons that
are created by the
interaction of cosmic rays
that actually pass
through matter.
And the amount that
passes through the matter
is determined by
the density of it.
So if you have a muon that's
passing through solid stone,
and it impacts a target, then
you have a certain signature.
If there are voids,
then those voids
can be detected by the rate
of the number of muons that
actually impact the target.
The voids that were
discovered are actually
above the Grand Gallery.
And supposedly they
signify a chamber
that is about 100 feet long.
The interesting
thing about it is
that when you consider it in the
context of the Giza power plant
theory, for myself, the
jury's still out on that
because there is a
location that you can
see looking from east to west.
But there's nothing that I've
seen that shows north to south.
So while that void exists,
it's assumed that it's
above the Grand Gallery.
But is it displaced
east or west?
We don't know because
it's within that view.
Now the other question
about the technology
is that the resolution.
What is the resolution?
And then, of course,
you know, you
have to consider the
trajectory of the muons.
Are they coming in on an angle?
What are their true dimensions?
>>NOORY: Why is that
significant if they're
coming in at an angle?
>>DUNN: Well, I mean, if
you pass through anything,
if you're not looking
at it straight on, then
the dimensions could be
exaggerated because it passes
through at this point, and then
it's on an angle so it looks
larger when it--
it's like going through a
lens or something like that.
It could look smaller or larger.
But the location of it
is very interesting.
I'm very interested
to learn what
they find when they do
further explorations,
and I hope they do fairly soon.
>>NOORY: I think they will.
What are the chambers
like inside the pyramids
because they have
these little long tubes
of chambers and things?
What are they doing?
Where are they going?
>>DUNN: Well, that's one
of the unique features
of the Great Pyramid are
those, what you call, tubes.
Specifically if you talk
about the Queen's Chamber
in the Great Pyramid,
that has these tubes
that are going up on an angle
but don't exit the pyramid.
That was one of the mysteries.
And there are two
of the shafts that
go up on the north side and
the south side of the chamber.
>>NOORY: How long are they?
>>DUNN: I'd say about 200 and--
about 200 feet.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>DUNN: Long.
>>NOORY: By what,
a couple of feet?
>>DUNN: They don't exit.
No, they're only about
eight inches square.
>>NOORY: That's it?
>>DUNN: Yeah.
And then in the King's
Chamber, you have two shafts.
One is about 8.4 inches
wide by 4.8 inches high,
and that shaft
goes to the north.
And then on the south side,
you have a large opening
in the wall that looks
like a catcher's mitt,
like a horn antenna.
>>NOORY: Could they have carried
water or mercury or anything
like that?
>>DUNN: Well, I mean, if you--
any conduit can carry any
solution you put in it.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>DUNN: But the question
is, was that the reason?
They have been, I think,
incorrectly labeled air shafts.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>DUNN: But the
problem with that
is, particularly with
the Queen's Chamber,
they wouldn't have carried any
air because they were closed.
So why did they exist?
And that's what I address
in my book, "The Giza Power
Plant," just what the
purpose of those shafts is.
>>NOORY: And exactly
what do you think it was?
>>DUNN: Well, if you take
the whole pyramid and all
the features within
the pyramid, I actually
created a scenario where the
Great Pyramid is in harmony
or resonating with the earth
and drawing energy through it.
That energy is then transferred
into airborne sound.
The power center is
the King's Chamber,
and it's constructed
out of granite,
thousands of tons of granite.
And then the Queen's Chamber was
where they created a hydrogen
with two solutions
coming in from the north
side and the south side.
They mix, and they
create hydrogen.
>>NOORY: Remarkable.
>>DUNN: And there's evidence
to support my theory.
I think we've talked in the past
about Gantenbrink's door, where
they found those--
>>NOORY: That's the one
they drilled through.
>>DUNN: Yes, exactly.
And so there's more
information on that, I think,
that was revealed in 2011.
>>NOORY: How do you
think they cut the stone?
>>DUNN: Well, that's
an interesting question
because one of the
pieces of evidence
that I discovered in 2006
and included in my book,
"Lost Technologies
of Ancient Egypt,"
describes them
using circular saws.
>>NOORY: Circular saws?
>>DUNN: Circular saws.
>>NOORY: How big?
>>DUNN: Well, the
evidence clearly
shows that the saw must have
been over 37 feet in diameter.
>>NOORY: A 37-foot saw?
>>DUNN: Yes.
>>NOORY: My god.
And they had to have had
something to power this thing.
>>DUNN: Yes.
>>NOORY: And the revolutions to
cut through that kind of stone
must have been astronomical.
>>DUNN: Well, not necessarily
the revolutions but,
I mean, even as a
slow revolution,
the surface feet per minute,
the cutting edge of the saw
would be sufficient.
I mean, you wouldn't have
to turn it very quickly.
>>NOORY: What would the material
be to have constructed the saw?
>>DUNN: Obviously,
they would have
had to have used a material that
was harder than the granite.
And what we looked for--
>>NOORY: That's a big
diamond if that's what it is.
>>DUNN: But I mean, they create
saws today to cut granite,
and they embed diamond
in its substrate,
and it cuts very efficiently.
But it's a matter
of saying, you know,
if you have a mega project
like building a pyramid--
>>NOORY: Right.
>>DUNN: Then you actually create
mega machines to accomplish it.
And that is kind of like a
revolutionary concept in that
the picture that has
been kind of transmitted
to us over the years of
how pyramids were built--
>>NOORY: Just remarkable.
>>DUNN: Have been
people with, you know,
these stone balls or
chisels and, you know,
just banging away at the blocks.
But the evidence
shows otherwise.
>>NOORY: Where would a 37-foot
circular saw be right now?
Where would they put that?
>>DUNN: That's a good question
because when you consider
the thousands of years since
the pyramid was built, I mean,
there are different scenarios
that you can imagine.
If the pyramid was-- if
the pyramid was completed,
the people who built
it would take the saw,
you know, take it apart because
I'm assuming that something
that large would
come in sections.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>DUNN: And you would
assemble it on site.
>>NOORY: And take it apart.
>>DUNN: Right.
And then there's evidence on the
Giza plateau and Abu Rawash--
Abu Rawash has clear
evidence of this 37-foot saw.
>>NOORY: Clearly.
>>DUNN: Clearly.
>>NOORY: Do other people
see this or just you, Chris?
>>DUNN: I've seen
it, and other people
have seen it and verified it.
Other engineers-- I've taken
engineers to Abu Rawash
and showed it to them.
In fact, the two people that
I took there looked at it
and read my analysis
on it and said,
well, this is like
a new Rosetta Stone.
>>NOORY: It really is.
>>DUNN: Because it
describes a culture
that is much more advanced,
and it's hard evidence.
>>NOORY: The masonry techniques
also were incredible.
>>DUNN: Yep.
>> Bronze and copper tools of
the time are, at first sight,
too soft.
Yet a sarcophagus or
coffin makes it clear
that ancient Masons
could cut straight edges.
Close up, there are
striations, marks made
by the movement of a hard edge.
Mark challenges one of the
team to show him the answer.
>>MARK: All right.
We have a big block
of granite here.
So how's this copper
going to cut this granite?
>>DENNIS STOCKS:
We're going to use
the saw in a reciprocating or
backwards and forward motion.
>> Dennis Stocks, an expert
in ancient technology,
suggests the Egyptians had
a trick up their sleeves.
>>STOCKS: Helps us
all get started.
>>MARK: So you're
going to chip a groove,
and then you're going
to put the copper
and slide it back and forth.
And that's going
to cut the granite?
>>STOCKS: No, Mark.
>> Even with teeth, the
copper alone is too soft.
>>MARK: OK, well,
what is actually
going to do the cutting.
It seems to me that copper is
just going to blunt on granite.
I can't believe it's
going to cut the stone.
>>STOCKS: We're going to
put sand inside the groove.
And we're going to put
this saw on top of the sand
and then let the
sand do the cutting.
All that needs to be
done is to move the saw
backwards and forwards
in a nice steady motion.
>>MARK: You don't want
to lift it up and get
those grains in there.
>>STOCKS: No, they'll work
themselves in as he goes.
OK.
That's it.
Now the stone weight
at each end of the saw
are putting the load onto the
sand and causes the cutting.
The crystal is forced to
score a groove in the stone.
>>MARK: So the copper is
only guiding the sand.
The sand's doing the cutting.
>>STOCKS: Right.
>>NOORY: That's
all well and good,
Christopher, but
that would take a lot
of going back and forth
to cut those blocks we
see in the pyramids.
>>DUNN: Yes, and that
particular method
does not explain the evidence
because the evidence indicates
that the saw was moving through
the material at a higher speed
rate.
And the striations on the
stone with that method,
you would not be able to move
the saw through very quickly.
>>NOORY: It might have been
used for smaller blocks maybe?
Is that possible?
>>DUNN: I mean, I
think if you had--
>>NOORY: Or just toss
the whole theory out.
>>DUNN: I think if-- no, if
you have the technology--
if you have the technology
to cut the stones
and leave the striations
on the large blocks
that I've seen in Egypt,
there's no reason for you
to revert to a method like
that to cut smaller blocks.
>>NOORY: There's
something in the Petrie
Museum, some kind of granite
core with spiral grooves.
What is that all about?
>>DUNN: That was a--
William Flinders Petrie
discovered that at Giza
in 1881.
And he wrote a book called,
"Pyramids and Temples of Giza."
It was published in 1883, and
he described this core as being
tapered and that the
drill, whatever drilled it,
had per revolution of the
drill, it cut about 100,000s per
revolution.
So for every revolution down,
it sank into the granite
about one eighth of an inch.
And that is an amazing
and tremendous speed rate.
>>NOORY: It's great
science, wasn't it?
>>DUNN: Well, it would
have been science--
science, engineering, tech
techniques, technology.
But it's a very
mysterious object.
And at first, when
I analyzed it,
I thought that it may have been
cut using ultrasonic machining.
But since I received
a latex impression
of the outside of the core and
examined the grooves in it,
it is spiral.
But it's almost as though
parts of it have melted.
There was some application of
heat or something like that.
>>NOORY: Remarkable.
>>DUNN: -- assist
in the cutting.
But it's a very mysterious
object for sure.
>>NOORY: Christopher, what
about the moving of the blocks?
Even though it's remarkable that
they may have had power saws--
>>DUNN: Right.
>>NOORY: How did they
move these things?
They're huge.
>>DUNN: Well, that's
one of the things
that really when we look at
how the pyramids were built,
and we look at how
they moved obelisks
and these massive statues
somewhere, weighing 1,000 tons,
how were they moved?
And how did they
build the pyramid,
you know, in a short period of
time when some of the blocks
weigh--
>>NOORY: Tons.
>>DUNN: 70 tons.
>>DUNN: And taking blocks to a--
>>NOORY: We couldn't
move them today.
>>DUNN: Oh, well,
I mean, I wouldn't
say that we couldn't if we
had a purpose to do that.
I mean, 200 tons, they've
lifted 100-ton vessels,
you know, nuclear vessels
to a higher elevation.
>>NOORY: But the cranes
were huge to lift them.
>>DUNN: Yeah, the
cranes were huge.
And you know, there are people
who specialize in lifting,
crane drivers and what they call
riggers who will analyze a site
and determine what they need
to move a block from point A
to point B. And
the company I work
for had moved a 100-ton
press into the plant.
And so that was quite
an ordeal, where
they had to bring a crane down
in sections on five semi loads
and then assemble it.
>>NOORY: Just remarkable.
>>DUNN: And so for
five days, they
were bringing these pieces
in and assembling it.
And then they actually
picked the load
and dropped it into the plant.
>>NOORY: Do you think they
had extraterrestrial help?
>>DUNN: You know,
there has been--
that has been-- it seems to have
been a popular idea that people
have attached to it.
I tend to--
I tend to think more along
the lines of a more advanced
civilization.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>DUNN: Such as, say,
our civilization.
>>NOORY: That kind
of technology.
>>DUNN: If we have--
there is a lot--
a lot of the technology
that we see in Egypt,
when it comes to
cutting and shaping,
we have the tools today
to be able to do that.
The lifting is another matter.
And so while it's possible to
do it, what the methods are,
I think they would use
a more efficient method.
I think they actually had
levitation technologies,
anti-gravity technologies.
>>NOORY: Sound
resonance, something.
>>DUNN: Now I don't--
I'm not-- I don't want to
escape your previous question
on the extraterrestrial help.
That idea, I have not seen
any credible information
that would prove that.
And you know, it's hard.
When it comes to evidence
and the analysis of evidence,
we have to assume
that this planet--
the genius of the human race
is evident in all cultures
throughout--
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>DUNN: Throughout history,
whether you go back millennia,
and civilization is cyclical.
And we go through cycles of
the rise of a civilization
and the fall of civilization.
For some reason, whether
it's extraterrestrial impacts
like a comet strike, which it
seems like there's evidence
for that now, it will destroy
a large section of society
and sometimes throw the
whole planet back in time.
I mean, today if it happened,
we could be thrown back
to being a medieval society.
>>NOORY: If they had
levitation technology,
how might that have worked?
If I knew the answer to
that, I'd be a billionaire.
>>NOORY: Yes, you would.
Do you think they had
that kind of technology?
>>DUNN: I do.
And I think the methods used by
Edward Leedskalnin in Florida.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>DUNN: You know, who--
he built Coral Castle.
That is a subject to itself.
We could talk for an
hour through all that.
>>NOORY: He said he knew
the secrets of the pyramids.
>>DUNN: Exactly.
And his place is a mystery, too.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>DUNN: I've been down
there several times.
So I definitely think
that they had that.
And I think that technology
was used probably
widely across the
planet because we
have many of these like
impossible structures
where they were moving
extremely, extremely
large rocks.
>>NOORY: And are
those structures
that are around the
planet similar to Giza?
>>DUNN: Some are
similar, but they're not.
I mean, I look at Giza
and Egypt as being the--
it's almost like they had
developed their manufacturing
technology to a
higher level that you
find in other areas
like, you know,
the standing stones in England,
or if you go to France.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>DUNN: In Peru, there's
evidence of precise cutting,
but it doesn't seem to have
the same geometric format
or protocol that
you find in Egypt.
The three-dimensional precise
curves that you have in Egypt,
you may find square
blocks in Peru, Bolivia.
Puma Punku is a fine
example of precise cutting.
But the magnitude
of the techniques
is all centered in
Egypt, in my opinion.
>>NOORY: Anything like this
happening today anywhere?
>>DUNN: Well, I mean, you have--
I mean, as far as
working in stone,
of course, we're looking
into our ancient past,
and we're looking at the
skeleton of a civilization.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>DUNN: What we create
essentially is in steel,
metals, that would
erode over time.
And so they probably wouldn't
exist 10,000 years from now.
But what we do today with
our machines is similar.
I mean, we could achieve
the same precision,
the same quality of cuts
using modern equipment as what
the ancient Egyptians
were using for sure.
>>NOORY: Let's go back
to your original theory
that it's a power plant.
>>DUNN: Right.
>>NOORY: What was it powering?
What was the power
being used for?
>>DUNN: I would assume
that whatever technologies
that they had that they could
have used electricity to power
it.
That isn't like a huge question.
It's almost like a
chicken and the egg.
What came first, the
chicken or the egg?
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>DUNN: But how do
you build the pyramid?
Well, you say you
use power tools.
>>NOORY: But where did
the power come from?
>>DUNN: Where did
your power come from
to build the power plant?
Well, today where does
our power come from
to build the power plant?
If they know about
electricity, they
know how to create
electricity, and they
power tools, and they're
building with that technology.
But the pyramid power plant
or the energy from that,
I mean your imagination today,
you have a lot of corollaries.
If you think about
Tesla and what
he proposed in terms of
the wireless transmission
of energy.
And the Giza power plants,
the energy being created
is a microwave being that comes
out of the southern shaft.
At that point where it
exits the southern shaft,
there's very little
evidence at Giza
to describe what
happened at that point.
It could have been beamed into
outer space, been transmitted
to another point.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>DUNN: --on the planet.
Or it could have been
transferred, you know,
or spread into the
atmosphere where
it could have been collected,
like a Wardenclyffe
Tower, the Tesla technology.
So any kind of means that
we have devised today
we can compare
and say, yeah, OK,
if we know that this
power is being generated,
then we can assume that
they had figured out a way,
or they had a need for it.
Otherwise, why create
it in the first place?
>>NOORY: The fact
that the gap is there,
and the information
is literally gone.
>>DUNN: Right.
>>NOORY: And this
is not to take away
from your research and
the research of others.
But it really is gone because
everything is just speculation
and theory now.
>>DUNN: Right.
>>NOORY: I'm baffled, Chris, as
to how it just simply vanished
and disappeared.
I'm beginning to think that
some horrible calamity occurred,
whether it was a nuke war or
something that obliterated
that gap between then and now.
>>DUNN: Yes, and obviously there
seems to be a time in history
when they were
actually doing work.
I mean, they were working on
projects, and everything ended.
>>NOORY: Something happened.
>>DUNN: Something
happened suddenly,
and they weren't
able to continue.
And that is kind of related
to the pyramids in a way,
and how the pyramids were tuned
to the earth, and the purpose
of them.
Because what they
had developed is they
had developed what I would
call a tuned instrument.
If you consider
the Great Pyramid
as being like a
musical instrument,
a finely-tuned
instrument, and it
is drawing energy from the
earth and the designers
of this pyramid
and this science.
I calculated the
amount of energy
that they could bring
through the pyramid
and having function.
>>NOORY: Enormous,
had to be enormous.
>>DUNN: Yeah.
But it was a certain amount.
There's only a certain amount
of energy that that pyramid--
>>NOORY: Had the capacity for.
>>DUNN: Had the capacity
to handle and pass through.
Now if you-- but that's because
the earth is a known quantity.
It's a closed system.
So if you have a
comet strike that
comes in and hits
the planet, then you
have the introduction
of an enormous amount
of additional energy.
And so the pyramids weren't
able to pass through that energy
or handle that energy, and they
just started to shake apart
and were destroyed at
that point, as well
as a lot of the rest
of the civilization.
>>NOORY: Are the pyramids,
in your opinion, finished?
Were they completed?
>>DUNN: From what
I've seen, there
is one that was not completed.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>DUNN: And that
was at Abu Rawash.
And it seems that they
were in the process
of creating that pyramid
and everything stopped.
Because, you see, in that area,
they had these granite blocks,
and they were just
like boulders,
sitting out as though
being collected,
ready to be cut, and
put into position.
So that pyramid appears
to be unfinished.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>DUNN: And then you also
have the unfinished obelisk,
which is another enigma.
And it's a 1,200-ton obelisk
still attached to the bedrock.
>>NOORY: 1,200-tons.
>>DUNN: 1,200 tons.
>>NOORY: And they just
stopped with that one.
>>DUNN: Yeah, they
And the conventional
theories, they
claim that they stopped
because it developed a fissure.
But they had already gone
to a tremendous amount
of work and cutting
around that obelisk.
>>NOORY: Yeah, why stop?
>>DUNN: That even if it--
even if it didn't serve
as an obelisk anymore,
there was enough
stone there that you
could have used for
other projects, building
projects, and stuff like that.
So obviously everything stopped.
>>NOORY: Chris,
researcher David Hatcher
Childress has explored Egypt.
And there was a region in Egypt
that he looked at as well.
>>DAVID HATCHER
CHILDRESS: Yeah, here you
can see the lid pushed back.
The sarcophagus is open.
It's been chipped
away right here
probably trying to open it.
According to the
traditional Egyptologists,
these giant boxes
were sarcophagi
for the mummified bulls
of Apis, the sacred bulls
of ancient Egypt.
Yet the big mystery
really is how
they could possibly get boxes--
such gigantic, 85-ton
basalt sarcophagi
like this in here
and, in theory, just
to put a mummified bull inside.
>>NOORY: That
sarcophagus was huge.
>>DUNN: Yes, they are.
>>NOORY: I mean, what was it a
giant that they put in there?
>>DUNN: That's a
very good question.
No, I don't think they were
built to mummify or hold
any bodies at all.
I first went into
that facility--
it's at the Serapeum, which
is near Saqqara, and it's--
>>NOORY: How close
is that to Giza?
>>DUNN: Oh, it's about 20 miles.
>>NOORY: All right, not far.
>>DUNN: It's about--
and it's underground
so the whole facility is
dug out of the bedrock.
And you walk down a passageway
and into these tunnels.
And along the walls
of the tunnels--
they're like vaulted tunnels--
and they have these
crypts cut into the walls.
>>NOORY: Is everything a
mystery in Egypt, Chris?
My gosh.
>>DUNN: There's a lot
of mystery there, yes.
But those boxes are
significant, and I had actually
attempted to see how precise
they were because they appeared
to be very precise to me.
And I had a toolmakers square,
and the inside surfaces--
>>NOORY: Perfect.
>>DUNN: I won't say
perfect, but they
were within what I would
consider to be a tolerance that
was kind of equal to the
precision of the instrument I
was using.
>>NOORY: What would the
purpose of that place be?
>>DUNN: Oh, you know,
one person's guess
is as good as another.
The fact that you have
these gigantic boxes,
and there's over 20 of them.
And the insides were
crafted so precisely
that the lids were so heavy,
and where the lid actually
met the top of the
box, you couldn't even
get a light to shine through it.
>>NOORY: It was that tight.
>>DUNN: It was that-- it
was that precise, yeah.
I mean, it's an enormous-- it's
a tremendous accomplishment.
But the insides are parallel,
too, so the opposing surfaces
are parallel.
Where you have the underside
of the lid, and you know,
you put a square on the
other side of the lid,
and you see it's very powerful
from one side to the other.
And what they would need
to accomplish that--
even to measure it and to
maintain that tolerance--
>>NOORY: Oh, it's just--
>>DUNN: It far exceeds
what has been found
in the archaeological record.
So what were they
using them for?
I think that vibration
had something
to do with it because the--
>>NOORY: Anti-gravity?
>>DUNN: Certainly anti-gravity
getting them down in there.
But vibration in
how they function,
that because each of
the boxes was inserted
into a recess in the floor.
So there was some
reason they had--
there was a reason why
they had to have that set--
>>NOORY: Built in like that.
>>DUNN: So that
it wouldn't move.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>DUNN: And if you have
vibration going on,
things that are
laying on the surface
they could kind of walk
across the surface.
>>NOORY: Could they have been
earthquake shock absorbers?
>>DUNN: Oh, that's a--
I think actually the
pyramids are earthquake shock
absorbers--
shock absorbers, if you
look at it that way,
except they function to try
to eliminate earthquakes,
you know, relieve the
stresses in the earth's plates
so that they pass smoothly
over each other and don't bind.
And basically that's
how earthquakes
happen is that the plates
do not move smoothly.
They stick, and then
suddenly they will release,
and that's what causes
the displacement.
>>NOORY: Do you
think, Christopher,
if we ever really find out
the purpose of these pyramids,
we can then get other
answers in terms
of how were they constructed?
>>DUNN: Well, I think, I
mean, your question is counter
to my position on
it because I think--
>>NOORY: You think
you know what it is.
>>DUNN: I think we've
already determined
what they were used for.
>>NOORY: But could you be wrong?
>>DUNN: Could I be wrong?
Everybody could be wrong.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>DUNN: Everybody
could be wrong.
>>NOORY: Not being
disrespectful, Mr. Dunn.
>>DUNN: No, no, no, no, and all
theories should be challenged,
and other ideas--
I have received all
kinds of different ideas
on what the pyramids
were used for
and how energy was generated.
But for the most part,
people that contact me
are very supportive of the
idea, particularly engineers.
>>NOORY: That's a great idea.
>>DUNN: It's--
>>NOORY: It's a great theory.
>>DUNN: Well, it's
pretty far out.
It was certainly revolutionary
at the time it was published.
>>NOORY: Well, more
and more people
are beginning to think maybe
that's what it was for,
you know.
>>NOORY: It does seem that
today the pyramid as a machine
is well-embedded
in the narrative
about the ancient
Egyptian culture.
>>NOORY: There's an
engineer, John Burke--
I don't know if you
know John or not--
who looked at projects
about the pyramids as well.
>>JOHN BURKE: What
are the biggest
structures that modern
man builds on the planet?
The biggest, most awe-inspiring
structures we create
are hydroelectric dams.
Why are we willing to invest
such awe-inspiring amounts
of labor and effort
in constructing those?
Because we know
we're going to get
a very valuable physical return
in the form of electricity.
And by comparison, I wonder if
the ancient megalith builders
weren't willing to invest such
staggering amounts of resources
by even smaller populations
because they knew that they
could get something very
physical and worthwhile
back from it.
>> People are fascinated
by Egyptian monuments.
And some report the energy
is palpable at these sites.
Is it possible to
confirm this energy
through scientific means?
>>NOORY: Well,
there, again, we're
looking at the possibility that
it was some kind of power plant
to be used for some purpose.
Maybe it just fueled
all of Egypt, who knows.
>>DUNN: Well, I mean, the
questions that he asks
are exactly the same questions
that I asked when I started out
on this quest.
And it seems-- it's
logical for engineers
to think along those lines.
You know, when you consider
the investment of time
and the investment of
wealth into building them,
and to say that they were
just to be used for a tomb,
it just doesn't make
sense, especially when
you consider that it's
the state of the art that
has still not been equaled
today in terms of construction.
I mean, we don't require
buildings to have micron
precision, or even within
as Petrie measured,
back in the 1880s on
the casing stone there,
where line to line, they're to
within 10,000ths of an inch.
>>NOORY: Could we construct
that pyramid today?
>>DUNN: You know, I think if
there was a concerted effort,
you know, if we go back to the
'60s, and John Kennedy says,
we need to go to the moon,
we didn't know, you know,
how to get there.
We had no technology then.
>>NOORY: But what a great goal.
>>DUNN: But he said, we
need to shoot for the moon.
And I think if we
had, as a goal,
and we had the whole
civilization, the whole country
behind us, and to
say we need to learn
how to tap into
the earth energies
to relieve earthquakes
and perhaps also convert
that energy into
usable power, that
would be a worthwhile goal.
I mean, it's not just the--
it's not just the value
of the power of the energy
that you get out of the
system, but the reduction
in destruction, you
know, the wealth
that you're going to lose
if there is a very, very
large earthquake.
>>NOORY: Could it
have been a beacon
for some extraterrestrial craft?
>>DUNN: It could have been.
>>NOORY: Like a homing device?
>>DUNN: That has been proposed.
You know, it's
like my work ended
at the end of the
southern shaft.
It's like, OK, this is
where-- this is where I am.
This is a few ideas that I have.
But there have--
I mean, that seems to be a
popular idea if you really
get into fantasizing about--
>>NOORY: ETs.
>>DUNN: You know,
space-faring nations.
It could have been a
homing beacon or something
that would triangulate the
position of the craft in space.
Who knows?
I mean, I can imagine all kinds
of fantastic scenarios with it.
>>NOORY: Chris, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
Really remarkable work.
>>DUNN: My pleasure.
>>NOORY: So there you
have one of the greatest
mysteries of mankind,
the pyramids of Giza.
What were they used for?
How were they constructed?
Christopher Dunn believes
they're power plants.
What did they power?
It's anyone's guess.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]